---
header_title: "GM2 — Technology for the poorest billion"
title: "Model design for cell health testing of lithium ion batteries for second life use"
---

## Problem outline
We spend four weeks working alongside LiFETIME, a startup company looking to enable the second-life use of Lithium-ion batteries. Currently, batteries, especially those used in EVs, are deemed to reach “end-of-life” (EOL) when their maximum battery capacity falls to 70-80% of their rated value. These EOL batteries are then sent to landfill or recycling centres, both of which have severe environmental impacts including waste accumulation, fire hazard, and toxic gas release. There is very little circularity in the industry, with just 5% of Lithium-ion batteries currently being recycled, while batteries that still have 70-80% capacity are prematurely discarded.

This is where LiFETIME steps in. They are looking to provide a low-cost, open-source solution for cell health testing for second-life battery applications. Essentially, they hope to provide a cheap device that will quickly measure how much future potential a battery still has left, allowing the operator to decide whether it can continue to be used, and in what environments it can be used. While they focus on the hardware of their design, we have been tasked with investigating how to develop a model suitable for practical analysis of real-world cells. The brief was broad, with there being a plethora of methods of cell health analysis, so our first objective was to review existing literature on lithium-ion cell modelling, and better familiarise ourselves with the physics of battery degradation. Following a combination of discussion with LiFTIME and literature review we concluded that there are two potential routes we could pursue, either Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) data, or Incremental Capacity Analysis (ICA). The team has collected sufficient primary data to allow us to follow either of these analysis techniques. Prior to our project, the data had not yet been used for any application other than for model validation. Because of time limitations, our project has focused on delivering key analysis of data and preliminary investigation into these two potential routes.

## Value
The value of LiFETIME to developing communities has the potential to be very high, as, inline with inclusive innovation practices and the sustainable development goals, it responds to a genuine need and adds significant value. With solar power and other less reliable renewable energy sources become more affordable and prevalent, the need for affordable energy storage is increasing. This is matched with the increase in battery use in the developed world, especially in EVs, and therefore we are seeing increased supply of these EOL batteries that still have 70-80% capacity. Second life batteries would enable stable electrification in areas that have unreliable energy supply, for example areas that rely on renewable energy sources or have unstable supply from another area. For example, in South Africa where ‘load-shedding’ (scheduled power outages as demand hugely exceeds supply) is a daily challenge, affordable batteries could give security to small business owners, allowing them to run fridges, payment machines and keep their internet connection and lights on. In rural areas where power supply is variable, second-life batteries could be used in hospitals to run oxygen concentrators or life support machines during outages or overnight. Increasing energy accessibility also enables alternative earnings, such as allowing crop farmers to run irrigation pumps powered by solar-battery systems for higher yield, and helps to reduce rural-urban developmental inequalities.

We have the potential to add considerable value to the startup by providing a starting point for the team to use when they begin to look at software. This value will be challenging to quantify, as there is no prior analysis of the data or existing model for us to compare our results to. Our work will involve the analysis of their data for the first time, and we hope that we will be able to provide useful research for LiFETIME to learn from as they go on to develop their software solution. Quantifying the success of this project is a challenge we have discussed with the project stakeholders, and further details of this can be seen in the project outline

## Alignment with SGDs and the UNICEF principles for Digital Development
Reflective discussion about the work’s alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals and where applicable with the UNICEF principles for Digital Development. -Joe
~500 words
We believe that the work of LiFETIME and their product has the potential to contribute to Sustainable Development Goals 7, 11 and 12. Inline with inclusive innovation practices, it responds to a genuine need and adds significant value.  

## Technical overview
On the inside, a lithium ion battery has two plates that can hold Lithium ions. The middle layer acts like a sieve, allowing lithium ions to pass, but electricity can’t. When you charge it, the lithium ions move from one side to the other to equalize out the electricity you put in. When you discharge it, the opposite happens, but since the electricity can’t go through the battery, it goes through whatever you’re trying to power. The primary way lithium batteries lose capacity is when the lithium gets stuck. Different lithium batteries can have different materials used in them, giving them different properties, but they all fundamentally work the same way. 

LiFETIME ran a series of cells of through a cell cycler, charging and discharging them hundreds of times. We looked through this data, and we were able to determine how much capacity the cells lost over these cycles. Anomalies exist in the data because of the way the testing was performed, which more work is needed to filter out. There were two types of batteries, first Lithium phosphate cells, like those used in solar energy storage and off-grid living. They barely lose any of their capacity, even after 250+ cycles. These batteries are less common because they’re generally heavier and larger. By contrast, the type of Lithium-cobalt cells used in your phone, laptop or car degrade pretty quickly. These cells were tested again 5 months later, and we saw that storing them charged in a box for a few months has severely degraded their capacity. Additionally, while the two cells that are identical to begin with, they degrade very differently over the same life. Further complicating things is voltage fade, where the cell voltage changes, reducing the amount of power it can output, and as a result it means we can measure capacity in two different ways, in mWh and mAh. 

So why hasn’t the challenge of quick and cheap cell health test already been solved? The cycling data is expensive and there are only a few academic datasets available. Additionally, degradation is complex. It depends on charging and discharging speed and depth, temperature, cell chemistry and the time spent charged. As we saw with the lifetime data, it can be very different even for cells with identical lives. Futhermore, batteries degrade by many different modes and the suitable future life applications depend on the process by which it has begun to degrade.

An alternative is EIS, or electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, which is a measurement technique used by scientists to get information about the processes that are happening inside a battery. Different chemical reactions in the cell happen at different speeds, so if we run electricity through the battery at different speeds and take measurements, we can draw a plot, called a spectrum, that gives us a hint as to what is going on inside the cell, and this is what we want to take advantage of. Note, the shape of the graph changes with the capacity of the battery. When we measure the EIS for a new battery, we want to be able to use the graph to create a simulation of what’s happening inside the cell, as this means we can run tests on a computer instead of on a battery.

EIS takes less than 15 minutes to run, so it’s much more convenient than using cycle data, which can take hours or even days to record. And, as we’re not fully charging and discharging the battery each time, it saves energy too. Once you own the equipment to do the testing, we think it’s a much cheaper way to test cells. But how do we use the EIS graph to simulate what’s going on inside the battery? We create a model based on something we already know how to analyse… a circuit! We find an equivalent electronic circuit, with wires, resistors and capacitors, that we can simulate on a computer. We choose the components of the circuit so that the graph produced on a computer matches the graph produced when we run it on the real battery. Each component in the circuit relates to something physical inside the real battery, as you can see on the slide. We had a go at fitting a circuit to our EIS data, and some circuits are a great fit, and some fit much less well. This is because of the different components used in the circuit model, and how well they relate to the aspects of the physical battery. The goal of our project was to take EIS data and try to find an equivalent circuit to match. The equivalent circuit model allows us to run tests on a computer without having to record more data from the physical battery. This will mean that a battery can have just one EIS test done using the LiFETIME device, taking as little as 10 or 15 minutes. Then, the computer will fit the EIS data to an electrical circuit model and runs analysis on the virtual circuit, which will give the results needed for the device to tell the user how much longer the battery can be expected to last, including information about parts of the battery that might be failing or fail next. 

One way we’re helping LiFETIME reach this end product, is by reporting the challenges of fitting a circuit model to EIS data. One challenge is that a circuit that fits well for one battery chemistry does not fit well with other batteries, as you can see, the spectra shown on the slides have different shapes. Another challenge is the fact that EIS spectra are different for different states of charge: for example if you do the test when the battery is at 20% charge, you will get a different result to doing it say, at 50 or 80%. Additionally, there are lots of different software packages that can be used to do this fitting, so this is something else we’ve investigated for LiFETIME. Some software is very specific to EIS, while others, such as scipy, are software for general optimisation. First we tried Impedance.py, a python package designed specifically for this purpose, which gave a great fit, but was extremely slow. Next we tried SciPy, which was much quicker but worse fit, as the data in the middle of the plot is much more densely populated and is incorrectly weighting the result. We improved this plot with something called Kernel Density Estimation. The idea of this is to sample data points proportionally to how close together they are, and this resulted in an improved fit. This is all still a work in progress, but we can pass our findings back to LiFETIME so that they can continue with our work and improve on our analysis.

In summary, battery degradation is complex, and is affected by a number of different factors. The most common way of testing batteries is by cycling them over and over again, but we think EIS is a better way of testing cells, because it is quick and less costly. Once you have recorded EIS data, an equivalent circuit model enables a computer to predict how the batteries will behave in their future life. This has huge potential to reduce battery waste and provide affordable energy storage for all. We were honoured to join LiFETIME for four weeks to complete research into capacity analysis, EIS and equivalent circuit modelling, and we hope our findings will help LiFETIME as they develop their product.

## Reflection
### Statement from Joe:
Statement about project management, explain the team work strategy. Reflect on
what worked and what didn’t work, drawing constructive recommendations where
possible. ~500 words, included in the webapge, git repo or github wiki.

### Statement from Amy:
I think the team work strategy was effective. Meeting frequently with each other and the partners was crucial to our progress, as we learnt more when we shared our findings and found that talking to the LiFETIME team quickly solved many of our issues and gave us ideas to pursure. I think the admin/ communications with the LiFETIME perhaps could have been shared between us, and we probably should've realised sooner that LiFETIME would have a GitHub and asked for it at the very start, and then when it wasn't shared immediately we definitely could have got the project leader involved (we only gained access to the GitHub late into the project). I think we could've got further with the ECM fitting and had more results to share with the team if the capacity analysis had been completed more quickly (or perhaps in less detail, once we had decided that it wasn't the route we were planning to pursue), allowing us to both focus on the EIS data and share the workload on the ECM analyis. However, the capacity analysis is still useful.
